---
layout: post
title: The Willingness to Help
tags: [Psychology]
color: rgb(9, 102, 194)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/4-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/4-cover.png"
authors: [QubitPi]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

One day I was thinking about who would be a good fit to DevOps Engineer. My personal experience told me that person must
be someone who is exceedingly willing to help others. How do we pick up the person like this is the focus of this post
then. 

<!--more-->

Imagine a work meeting. A colleague is fishing in her bag for a packet of cookies, takes one and offers the rest to 
others around the table. Why?

Perhaps because she finds them tasty and wants to share her experience. Or maybe because it is expected. But perhaps it 
is a strategic tactic that proves advantageous. Whether it is altruism, social norm or strategy, there are several 
reasons why people behave in a prosocial manner; meaning that they act in a way that has positive consequences for the 
recipient.

**Altruistic motivations**, for example, contribute to the well-being of another even though it may be at their own 
expense. In fact, altruistically motivated people, who are sometimes labelled as naive do-gooders, are in fact more intelligent. Interestingly, the questionnaires as a very commonly used technique turned out to be not as suitable for 
measuring this prosocial behaviour. It seems that they are more likely to register how people would like to see 
themselves or to be seen by others.

When somebody shares their treats with us there are definitely various reasons. We should be careful when someone is 
insistent with his or her good intentions. 

Characteristics of Altruism
---------------------------

### Feeling Good After Helping Others

Your motivation for altruistic behavior is not to boost your ego, but rather the knowledge that it's the right thing to do. You do good for others and embrace this as who you are rather than doing it for other people's approval.

### Putting Others First

Whether it's a promotion at work or something as simple as ordering at a restaurant, you put others first and go with 
what they like. More often than not, you end up doing something or going somewhere just because the other person wanted 
to.

Your small acts of kindness and selflessness often go unnoticed, but you also don't put a lot of emphasis on them. Even 
when people notice your altruistic behavior and try to be thankful, you accept that with humility.

### Empowering People

Instead of dumping your emotional issues on people and being a pain to be around, you empower others in day-to-day life. 
You support, encourage and empower others, because you’re an altruist. Letting people know their true worth comes 
naturally to you. You often motivate your friends and family to go after their dreams and do what they love. This is an 
example of altruistic behavior.

Altruistic individuals pump others up with positive energy, and so do you. Your help others reach their full potential 
and be successful – even if it means putting your dreams on the sideline for a while to help someone.

### People Love to Be Around You

Since you believe in others and rarely question their caliber, most people love to hang out with you. Altruistic behavior
makes the lives of those around you better. You value others and they reciprocate by spending time with you. Selflessness
is characterized by helping others without expecting anything in return from them. You spread love by being positive and 
you're treated well because, "what goes around comes around". Altruists tend to build and maintain very positive and 
healthy relationships.

### You Serve the Community

You like to know what's going on within your community, so you do your best to find out where the needs lie, and get 
involved. Whether it's making cookies for those in line at the homeless shelter down the street, volunteering at an 
animal shelter, raising money for the local school, or something as simple as helping your neighbor move - you figure out
where your efforts are required and then offer them willingly.

### You Don't Take Yourself Too Seriously

Your altruism resides in realizing that there are some things in the world more important than your own life and 
happiness. You have the realization that you are but a small unit on a small planet. The values you espouse are connected
to the well-being of your fellow beings and go beyond your personal likes and dislikes.

### You Possess a Healthy Level of Self-Confidence

You are so sure in your morals and beliefs that you very rarely question yourself or experience self-doubt. You know that 
you’re truly making the lives of those around you better— and let’s not forget, it makes your life better as well.

Why Are Some People More Altruistic Than Others?
------------------------------------------------

### Ability of Accurate Identification of Fear Facial Expressions

A recent study conducted at Georgetown University found that people who demonstrate strong altruism actually have a more 
active (and sometimes larger) right amygdala, which is a part of the brain essential to our feeling and perceiving 
emotions, especially fear. This finding hints at a possible link between altruism and the neurologically-driven
**capacity to observe fear** and empathize with this fear in others. Psychology researcher Abigail Marsh explains this 
concept further in her [TED Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uq-6T6TAu74) on altruism

In other words, because you are
**[more sensitive to the way others, including strangers, are feeling](https://hsperson.com/test/highly-sensitive-test/)**,
you're more likely to want to help them through a difficult situation. Their fear registers in your brain. When you help 
them alleviate that fear, it helps you feel better, too.

References
----------

- [Altruistic Behavior: Signs You're an Altruistic Person](https://circledna.com/blog/altruistic-behavior-signs-youre-an-altruistic-person/)
- [Altruism meaning: What is altruism? Why is it important?](https://thriveworks.com/blog/5-characteristics-of-the-truly-altruistic-person/)
- [Why Are Some People More Altruistic Than Others?](https://www.waldenu.edu/online-bachelors-programs/bs-in-psychology/resource/why-are-some-people-more-altruistic-than-others)
