---
layout: post
title: Practical Tips for Managing Remote Workers
tags: [Management]
color: rgb(0, 0, 0)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/8-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/8-cover.png"
authors: [QubitPi]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

How Managers Can Support Remote Employees
-----------------------------------------

### Setting Clear Expectations

It is crucial to provide clear guidance on priorities when employees work remotely. What is the same as in-office work 
and what may be different? Are there particular times of day that you would expect employees to be immediately
available? Just as in office environments, people leave their remote workspaces for breaks, meals and errands. Setting 
ground rules will help to avoid undue confusion.

### Acknowledging the Uncertainty

If there is uncertainty surrounding remote work, identify and communicate a sense of calm, and reinforce and recognize 
the bumps, missteps, and growing pains that can come along with these changes. Make sure to co-create communication
plans with employees, seek feedback and input on what is and isn't working.

### Checking in More Often

Many quick conversations that normally happen in hallways, before or after meetings, or just from stopping by each 
other's desks are no longer possible. You'll need to be intentional about checking in and following up at least once 
daily if not more. Along with individual check-ins, it's a good practice to begin and end the day with a quick team 
meeting or check in. This keeps everyone updated and hearing the same message at the same time, people are able to 
contribute to the team, and everyone feels more socially connected.

### Making Sure Everyone is on the Same Systems

There are many, many systems available for messaging, video calls, file storage, etc. It's important to set and enforce 
the expectation for which systems your team will be using.

### Communicating Intentionally

Remote communication can be more complex than face to face so it is important to actively listen, repeat back or ask 
questions to ensure understanding, and be on the lookout for any signs of misunderstanding. Make sure to clarify who is 
responsible for what by when at the end of every meeting.

### Watching for New Stressors in Your Remote Team Members

Situations that result in a change in work arrangements has the potential to create stress and/or anxiety. Adapting to 
working differently can be challenging to your team. 

### Seeking Feedback and Ideas

Ask your team about their needs and concerns, ideas for communicating better and being more cohesive as a team, and 
feedback to help you better lead and support them. You are all in it together, and the inclusive discussion and 
collaboration can lead to some great ideas and solutions for your team.

### Setting the Example

Your employees are looking to you as a model for how to navigate the changes and succeed in a remote work environment. 
Setting a tone with positivity, active communication and an openness to discussing questions and concerns will help your 
team be better prepared for success in a remote workplace.

### Providing Several Different Communication Technology Options

Email alone is insufficient. Remote workers benefit from having a "richer" technology, such as video conferencing, that 
gives participants many of the visual cues that they would have if they were face-to-face. Video conferencing has many 
advantages, especially for smaller groups: Visual cues allow for increased "mutual knowledge" about coworkers and also 
help reduce the sense of isolation among teams. Video is also particularly useful for complex or sensitive
conversations, as it feels more personal than written or audio-only communication.

### Establishing "Rules of Engagement"

Remote work becomes more efficient and satisfying when managers set expectations for the frequency, means, and ideal 
timing of communication for their teams. For example, "We use videoconferencing for daily check-in meetings, but we use
IM when something is urgent." Also, if you can, let your employees know the best way and time to reach you during the 
workday (e.g., "I tend to be more available late in the day for ad hoc phone or video conversations, but if there's an 
emergency earlier in the day, send me a text.") Finally, keep an eye on communication among team members (to the extent 
appropriate), to ensure that they are sharing information as needed.

The most important factor is that all employees share the same set of expectations for communication.

### Providing Opportunities for Remote Social Interaction

One of the most essential steps a manager can take is to structure ways for employees to interact socially (that is,
having informal conversations about non-work topics) while working remotely. This is true for all remote workers, but 
particularly so for workers who have been abruptly transitioned out of the office.

The easiest way to establish some basic social interaction is to leave some time at the beginning of team calls just for 
non-work items (e.g., "We're going to spend the first few minutes just catching up with each other. How was your 
weekend?"). Other options include virtual pizza parties (in which pizza is delivered to all team members at the time of 
a videoconference), or virtual office parties (in which party “care packages” can be sent in advance to be opened and 
enjoyed simultaneously). While these types of events may sound artificial or forced, experienced managers of remote 
workers (and the workers themselves) report that virtual events help reduce feelings of isolation, promoting a sense of 
belonging.

### Offering Encouragement and Emotional Support

Especially in the context of an abrupt shift to remote work, it is important for managers to acknowledge stress, listen 
to employees' anxieties and concerns, and empathize with their struggles. If a newly remote employee is clearly 
struggling but not communicating stress or anxiety, ask them how they're doing. Even a general question such as "How is 
this remote work situation working out for you so far?" can elicit important information that you might not otherwise 
hear. Once you ask the question, be sure to listen carefully to the response, and briefly restate it back to the 
employee, to ensure that you understood correctly. Let the employee's stress or concerns (rather than your own) be the 
focus of this conversation.

Research on emotional intelligence and emotional contagion tells us that employees look to their managers for cues about 
how to react to sudden changes or crisis situations. If a manager communicates stress and helplessness, this will have 
what Daniel Goleman calls a "trickle-down" effect on employees. Effective leaders take a two-pronged approach, both 
acknowledging the stress and anxiety that employees may be feeling in difficult circumstances, but also providing 
affirmation of their confidence in their teams, using phrases such as "we've got this," or "this is tough, but I know we
can handle it," or "let's look for ways to use our strengths during this time." With this support, employees are more 
likely to take up the challenge with a sense of purpose and focus.
