---
layout: post
title: Security
tags: [Security, SecurityContext, Authorization, OAuth, Access Token, HTTPS]
color: rgb(50,205,50)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/17-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/17-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}

## Securing server

### SecurityContext

Security information of a request is available by injecting a JAX-RS ***`SecurityContext`*** instance using `@Context`
annotation. The injected security context instance provides the equivalent of the functionality available on
[HttpServletRequest](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/servlet/http/HttpServletRequest.html) API. The injected
security context depends on the actual Jersey application deployment. For example, for a Jersey application deployed in
a Servlet container, the Jersey `SecurityContext` will encapsulate information from a security context retrieved from
the Servlet request. In case of a Jersey application deployed on a Grizzly server, the `SecurityContext` will return
information retrieved from the Grizzly request.

`SecurityContext` can be used in conjunction with sub-resource locators to return different resources based on the
specific roles a user principal is included in. For example, a sub-resource locator could return a different resource if
a user is a preferred customer:

```java
@Path("basket")
public ShoppingBasketResource get(@Context SecurityContext securityContext) {
    if (securityContext.isUserInRole("PreferredCustomer") {
        return new PreferredCustomerShoppingBasketResource();
    } else {
        return new ShoppingBasketResource();
    }
}
```

`SecurityContext` is inherently request-scoped, yet can also be injected into fields of singleton resources and JAX-RS
providers. In such case the proxy of the request-scoped `SecurityContext` will be injected.

```java
@Singleton
@Path("resource")
public static class MyResource {

    // Jersey will inject proxy of Security Context
    @Context
    SecurityContext securityContext;
 
    @GET
    public String getUserPrincipal() {
        return securityContext.getUserPrincipal().getName();
    }
}
```

#### Initializing Security Context with Servlets

As described above, the `SecurityContext` by default (if not overwritten by a request filter) only exposes security
information from the underlying container. In the case you deploy a Jersey application in a Servlet container, you need
to configure the Servlet container security aspects (`<security-constraint>`, `<auth-constraint>` and user to roles
mappings) in order to be able to secure requests via calls to to the JAX-RS `SecurityContext`.

#### Using Security Context in Container Request Filters

The `SecurityContext` can be directly retrieved from ***`ContainerRequestContext`*** via `getSecurityContext()` method.
You can also replace the default `SecurityContext` in a request context with a custom one using the
`setSecurityContext(SecurityContext)` method. If you set a custom `SecurityContext` instance in your
***`ContainerRequestFilter`***, this security context instance will be used for injection into JAX-RS resource class
fields. This way you can implement a custom authentication filter that may setup your own `SecurityContext` to be used.
To ensure the early execution of your custom authentication request filter, set the filter priority to
***`AUTHENTICATION`*** using constants from `Priorities`. An early execution of you authentication filter will ensure
that all other filters, resources, resource methods and sub-resource locators will execute with your custom
`SecurityContext` instance.

### Authorization - Securing Resources

#### Security Resources with `web.xml`

In cases where a Jersey application is deployed in a Servlet container you can rely only on the standard Java EE Web
application security mechanisms offered by the Servlet container and configurable via application's `web.xml`
descriptor. You need to define the `<security-constraint>` elements in the `web.xml` and assign roles which are able to
access these resources. You can also define HTTP methods that are allowed to be executed. See the following example.

```xml
<security-constraint>
    <web-resource-collection>
        <url-pattern>/rest/admin/*</url-pattern>
    </web-resource-collection>
    <auth-constraint>
        <role-name>admin</role-name>
    </auth-constraint>
</security-constraint>
<security-constraint>
    <web-resource-collection>
        <url-pattern>/rest/orders/*</url-pattern>
    </web-resource-collection>
    <auth-constraint>
        <role-name>customer</role-name>
    </auth-constraint>
</security-constraint>
<login-config>
    <auth-method>BASIC</auth-method>
    <realm-name>my-default-realm</realm-name>
</login-config>
```

The example secures *two* kinds of URI namespaces using the HTTP Basic Authentication. `rest/admin/*` will be accessible
only for user group `"admin"` and `rest/orders/*` will be accessible for `"customer"` user group. ***This security
configuration does not use JAX-RS or Jersey features at all as it is enforced by the Servlet container even before a
request reaches the Jersey application***. Keeping these security constrains up to date with your JAX-RS application
might not be easy as whenever you change the `@Path` annotations on your resource classes you may need to update also
the `web.xml` security configurations to reflect the changed JAX-RS resource paths. Therefore Jersey offers a
[more flexible solution](#securing-jax-rs-resources-with-standard-javaxannotationsecurity-annotations) based on placing
standard Java EE security annotations directly on JAX-RS resource classes and methods.

#### Securing JAX-RS Resources with Standard `javax.annotation.security` Annotations

With Jersey you can define the access to resources based on the user group using annotations. You can, for example,
define that only a user group `"admin"` can execute specific resource method. To do that you firstly need to register
[RolesAllowedDynamicFeature](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/filter/RolesAllowedDynamicFeature.html)
as a provider. The following example shows how to register the feature if your deployment is based on a
[ResourceConfig](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/ResourceConfig.html).

```java
final ResourceConfig resourceConfig = new ResourceConfig(MyResource.class);
resourceConfig.register(RolesAllowedDynamicFeature.class);
``` 

Alternatively, typically when deploying your application to a Servlet container, you can implement your JAX-RS
`Application` subclass by extending from the Jersey `ResourceConfig` and registering the `RolesAllowedDynamicFeature` in
the constructor:

```java
public class MyApplication extends ResourceConfig {

    public MyApplication() {
        super(MyResource.class);
        register(RolesAllowedDynamicFeature.class);
    }
}
```

Once the feature is registered, you can use annotations from package `javax.annotation.security` defined by JSR-250. See
the following example.

```java
@Path("/")
@PermitAll
public class Resource {

    @GET
    @RolesAllowed("user")
    public String get() { return "GET"; }
 
    @POST
    @RolesAllowed("admin")
    public String post(String content) { return content; }
 
    @Path("sub")
    public SubResource getSubResource() {
        return new SubResource();
    }
}
```


The resource class Resource defined in the example is annotated with a
***[@PermitAll](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/annotation/security/PermitAll.html)*** annotation. This means
that all methods in the class which do not override this annotation will be permitted for all user groups (no
restrictions are defined). In our example, the annotation will only apply to the `getSubResource()` method as it is the
only method that does not override the annotation by defining custom role-based security settings using the
***[@RolesAllowed](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/annotation/security/RolesAllowed.html)*** annotation.
`@RolesAllowed` annotations present on the other methods define a role or a set of roles that are allowed to execute a
particular method.

These Java EE security annotations are processed internally in the request filter registered using the Jersey
`RolesAllowedDynamicFeature`. The roles defined in the annotations are tested against current roles set in the
`SecurityContext` using the `SecurityContext.isUserInRole(String role)` method. In case the caller is not in the role
specified by the annotation, the `HTTP 403 (Forbidden)` error response is returned.

## Client Security

For details about client security please see the
[Client post](https://qubitpi.github.io/jersey-guide/2020/07/27/5-client-api.html). Jersey client allows to define
parameters of SSL communication using HTTPS protocol. You can also use jersey built-in authentication filters which
perform ***HTTP Basic Authentication*** or ***HTTP Digest Authentication***. See the
[Client post](https://qubitpi.github.io/jersey-guide/2020/07/27/5-client-api.html) for more details.

## OAuth Support

***OAuth*** is a specification that defines secure authentication model on behalf of another user. Two versions of OAuth
exists at the moment - ***OAuth 1*** defined by [OAuth 1.0 specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5849) and
***OAuth 2*** defined by [OAuth 2.0 specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749). OAuth 2 is the latest version
and it is not backward compatible with OAuth 1 specification. OAuth in general is widely used in popular social Web
sites in order to grant access to a user account and associated resources for a third party consumer (application). The
consumer then usually uses RESTful Web Services to access the user data. The following example describes a use case of
the OAuth (similar for OAuth 1 and OAuth 2). The example is simple and probably obvious for many developers but
introduces terms that are used in this documentation as well as in Jersey OAuth API documentation.

Three parties act in an OAuth scenario:

{% include aligner.html images="pexels/2020-08-08-17-security/oauth-parties.png" column=1 %}

The first party represents a user, in our case Adam, who is called in the OAuth terminology a ***Resource Owner***. Adam
has an account on Twitter. Twitter represents the second party. This party is called a ***Service Provider***. Twitter
offers a web interface that Adam uses to create new tweets, read tweets of others etc. Now, Adam uses our new web site,
HelloWorldWeb, which is a very simple web site that says Hello World but it additionally displays the last tweet of the
logged in user. To do so, our web site needs to have access to the Twitter account of Adam. Our web site is a 3rd party
application that wants to connect to Twitter and get Adam's tweets. In OAuth, such party is called ***Consumer***. Our
Consumer would like to use Twitter's RESTful APIs to get some data associated with Adam's Twitter account. In order to
solve this situation Adam could directly give his Twitter password to the HelloWorldWeb. This would however be rather
unsafe, especially if we do not know much about the authors of the application.

If Adam would give his password to HelloWorldWeb, he would have to deal with the associated security risks.

* Adam would have to fully trust HelloWorldWeb that it will not misuse the full access to his Twitter account.
* If Adam would change his password, he would need to remember to give the new password also to the HelloWorldWeb
  application.
* If Adam would like to revoke the HelloWorldWeb's access to his Twitter account, he would need to change his password
  again.
  
The OAuth protocol has been devised to address all these challenges.

With OAuth, a resource owner (Adam) grants an access to a consumer (HelloWorldWeb) without giving it his password. This
access grant is achieved by a procedure called ***authorization flow***. Authorization flow is out of the scope of this
documentation and its description can be found in the OAuth specification linked above. The result of the authorization
flow is an ***Access Token*** which is later used by the consumer to authenticate against the service provider. While
this brief description applies to both OAuth 1 and 2, note that there are some differences in details between these two
specifications.

Jersey OAuth is currently supported for the following use cases and OAuth versions:

* OAuth 1: Client (consumer) and server (service provider) 
* OAuth 2: Client (consumer)

With client and server support there are two supported scenarios:

* Authorization flow
* Authentication with Access Token (support for authenticated requests)

### OAuth 1

OAuth 1 protocol is based on message signatures that are calculated using specific signature methods. ***Signatures***
are quite complex and therefore are implemented in a separate module. The OAuth 1 Jersey modules are (
`groupId:artifactId:description`):

* `org.glassfish.jersey.security:oauth1-client`: provides *client* OAuth 1 support for authorization flow and
  authentication
* `org.glassfish.jersey.security:oauth1-server`: provides *server* OAuth 1 support for authorization flow, SPI for token
  management including authentication filter.
* `org.glassfish.jersey.security:oauth1-signature`: provides support for OAuth1 request signatures. This module is a
  dependency of previous two modules and as such it will be implicitly included in your maven project. The module can be
  used as a standalone module but this will not be needed in most of the use cases. You would do that if you wanted to
  implement your own OAuth support and would not want to deal with implementing the complex signature algorithms.
  
#### Server

To add support for OAuth into your **server-side** application, add the following dependency to your pom.xml:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.glassfish.jersey.security</groupId>
    <artifactId>oauth1-server</artifactId>
    <version>2.31</version>
</dependency>
```

Again, there is no need to add a direct dependency to the signature module, it will be transitively included.

Let's now briefly go over the most important server Jersey OAuth APIs and SPIs:

* **[OAuth1ServerFeature](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/oauth1/OAuth1ServerFeature.html)** -
  The feature which enables the OAuth 1 support on the server and registers `OAuth1Provider` explained next.
* **[OAuth1Provider](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/oauth1/OAuth1Provider.html)** -
  Implementation of this SPI must be registered to the server runtime as a standard provider. The implementation will be
  used to create request and access token, get consumer by consumer key, etc. You can either implement your provider or
  use the default implementation provided by Jersey by
  [DefaultOAuth1Provider](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/oauth1/DefaultOAuth1Provider.html).
* **[OAuth1ServerProperties](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/oauth1/OAuth1ServerProperties.html)** -
  properties that can be used to configure the OAuth 1 support.
* **[OAuth1Consumer](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/oauth1/OAuth1Consumer.html)**
  &
  **[OAuth1Token](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/server/oauth1/OAuth1Token.html)** -
  classes that contain consumer key, request and access tokens. You need to implement them only if you also implement
  the interface `OAuth1Provider`.
  
First step in enabling Jersey OAuth 1 support is to register a `OAuth1ServerFeature` instance initialized with an
instance of `OAuth1Provider`. Additionally, you may configure the ***Request Token URI*** and ***Access Token URI*** -
the endpoints accessible on the OAuth server that issue Request and Access Tokens. These endpoints are defined in the
OAuth 1 specification and are contacted as part of the OAuth authorization flow.

Next, when a client initiates the OAuth authorization flow, the provided implementation of `OAuth1Provider` will be
invoked as to create new tokens, get tokens and finally to store the issued Access Token. If a consumer already has a
valid Access Token and makes Authenticated Requests (with OAuth 1 Authorization information in the HTTP header), the
provider will be invoked to provide the `OAuth1Token` for the Access Token information in the header.

#### Client

> ðŸ“ OAuth client support in Jersey is almost identical for OAuth 1 and OAuth 2. As such, this section provides useful
> information even for users that use OAuth 2 client support.

To add support for OAuth into your Jersey client application, add the following dependency to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.glassfish.jersey.security</groupId>
    <artifactId>oauth1-client</artifactId>
    <version>2.31</version>
</dependency>
```

As mentioned earlier, there is no need to add a direct dependency to the signature module, it will be transitively
included. 

The most important parts of the Jersey client OAuth API and SPI are explained here:

* ***[OAuth1ClientSupport](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/OAuth1ClientSupport.html)*** -
  The main class which contains builder methods to build features that enable the OAuth 1 support. Start with this class
  every time you need to add any OAuth 1 support to the Jersey Client (build an Authorization flow or initialize client
  to perform authenticated requests). The class contains a static method that returns an instance of `OAuth1Builder` and
  also the class defines request properties to influence behaviour of the authenticated request support.
* ***[OAuth1AuthorizationFlow](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/OAuth1AuthorizationFlow.html)*** -
  API that allows to perform the Authorization flow against service provider. Implementation of this interface is a
  class that is used as a standalone utility and is not part of the JAX-RS client. In other words, this is not a feature
  that should be registered into the client.
* ***[AccessToken](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/AccessToken.html)***
  &
  ***[ConsumerCredentials](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/ConsumerCredentials.html) -
  Interfaces that define Access Token classes and Consumer Credentials. Interfaces contain getters for public keys and
  secret keys of token and credentials.
  
An example of how Jersey OAuth 1 client API is used can be found in the [OAuth 1 Twitter Client Example](https://github.com/eclipse-ee4j/jersey/tree/master/examples/oauth-client-twitter).
The following code snippets are extracted from the example and explain how to use the Jersey OAuth client API. 

Before we start with any interaction with Twitter, we need to register our application on Twitter. See the example
[README.md](https://github.com/eclipse-ee4j/jersey/blob/master/examples/oauth-client-twitter/README.MD) file for the
instructions. As a result of the registration, we get the consumer credentials that identify our application. Consumer
credentials consist of **consumer key** and **consumer secret**.

As a first step in our code, we need to perform the authorization flow, where the user grants us an access to his/her
Twitter client.

```java
ConsumerCredentials consumerCredentials = new ConsumerCredentials("a846d84e68421b321a32d, "f13aed84190bc");
OAuth1AuthorizationFlow authFlow = OAuth1ClientSupport
        .builder(consumerCredentials)
        .authorizationFlow(
                "http://api.twitter.com/oauth/request_token",
                "http://api.twitter.com/oauth/access_token",
                "http://api.twitter.com/oauth/authorize"
        )
        .build();
```

Here we have built a `OAuth1AuthorizationFlow` utility component representing the OAuth 1 authorization flow, using
`OAuth1ClientSupport` and `OAuth1Builder` API. The static builder method accepts mandatory parameter with
`ConsumerCredentials`. These are credentials earlier issued by Twitter for our application. We have specified the
Twitter OAuth endpoints where Request Token, Access Token will be retrieved and Authorization URI to which we will
redirect the user in order to grant user's consent. Twitter will present an HTML page on this URI and it will ask the
user whether he/she would like us to access his/her account.

Now we can proceed with the OAuth authorization flow.

```java
String authorizationUri = authFlow.start();
// here we must direct the user to authorization uri to approve our application. The result will be verifier code (String).
AccessToken accessToken = authFlow.finish(verifier);
```

In the first line, we start the authorization flow. The method internally makes a request to the
`http://api.twitter.com/oauth/request_token` URL and retrieves a Request Token. Details of this request can be found in
the [OAuth 1.0 specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5849). It then constructs a URI to which we must redirect
the user. The URI is based on Twitter's authorization URI (`http://api.twitter.com/oauth/authorize`) and contains a
Request Token as a query parameter. In the Twitter example, we have a simple console application therefore we print the
URL to the console and ask the user to open the URL in a browser to approve the authorization of our application. Then
the user gets a verifier and enters it back to the console. However, if our application would be a web application, we
would need to return a redirection response to the user in order to redirect the user automatically to the
`authorizationUri`.

Once we have a `verifier`, we invoke the method `finish()` on our `OAuth1AuthorizationFlow` instance, which internally
sends a request to an access token service URI (`http://api.twitter.com/oauth/access_token`) and exchanges the supplied
`verifier` for a new valid Access Token. At this point the authorization flow is finished and we can start using the
retrieved AccessToken to make authenticated requests. We can now create an instance of an OAuth 1 client `Feature` using
`OAuth1ClientSupport` and pass it our `accessToken`. Another way is to use `authFlow` that already contains the
information about access token to create the feature instance for us:

```java
Feature feature = authFlow.getOAuth1Feature();
Client client = ClientBuilder
        .newBuilder()
        .register(feature)
        .build();
```

Once the feature is configured in the JAX-RS `Client` (or `WebTarget`), all requests invoked from such Client (or
`WebTarget`) instance will automatically include an OAuth Authorization HTTP header (that contains also the OAuth
signature).

Note that if you already have a valid Access Token (for example stored in the database for each of your users), then you
can skip the authorization flow steps and directly create the OAuth `Feature` configured to use your Access Token.

```java
AccessToken storedToken = ...;
Feature filterFeature = OAuth1ClientSupport
        .builder(consumerCredentials)
        .feature()
        .accessToken(storedToken)
        .build();
```

Here, the `storedToken` represents an
[AccessToken](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/AccessToken.html)
that your client application keeps stored e.g. in a database.

Note that the OAuth feature builder API does not require the access token to be set. The reason for it is that you might
want to build a feature which would register the internal Jersey OAuth `ClientRequestFilter` and other related providers
but which would not initialize the OAuth providers with a single fixed
[AccessToken](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/AccessToken.html)
instance. In such case you would need to specify a token for every single request in the request properties. Key names and API documentation of these
properties can be found in `OAuth1ClientSupport`. Using this approach, you can have a single, OAuth enabled instance of
a JAX-RS Client (or `WebTarget`) and use it to make authenticated requests on behalf of multiple users. Note that you
can use the aforementioned request properties even if the feature has been initialized with an `AccessToken` to override
the default access token information for particular requests, even though it is probably not a common use case.

The following code shows how to set an access token on a single request using the Jersey OAuth properties. 

```java
Response response = client
        .target("http://my-serviceprovider.org/rest/foo/bar")
        .request()
        .property(OAuth1ClientSupport.OAUTH_PROPERTY_ACCESS_TOKEN, storedToken)
        .get();
```

`OAuth1AuthorizationFlow` internally uses a `Client` instance to communicate with the OAuth server. For this a new
`client` instance is automatically created by default. You can supply your instance of a `Client` to be used for the
authorization flow requests (for performance and/or resource management reasons) using
[OAuth1Builder](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/OAuth1Builder.html)
methods.

##### Public/Private Keys for RSA-SHA1 Signature Method

Follow the steps below in case the outgoing requests sent from client to server have to be signed with RSA-SHA1
signature method instead of the default one (HMAC-SHA1).

    $ # Create the private key.
    $ openssl genrsa -out private.key 2048
    $ # Convert the key into PKCS8 format.
    $ openssl pkcs8 -topk8 -in private.key -nocrypt
    $ # Extract the public key.
    $ openssl rsa -in private.key -pubout
    
The output of the second command can be used as a consumer secret to sign the outgoing request: new
`ConsumerCredentials("consumer-key", CONSUMER_PRIVATE_KEY)`. Public key obtained from the third command can be then used
on the service provider to verify the signed data.

For more advanced cases (i.e. other formats of keys) a custom `OAuth1SignatureMethod` should be implemented and used.

### OAuth 2 Support

At the moment Jersey supports OAuth 2 only on the client side.

#### Client

> ðŸ“ Note: It is suggested to read the section [Client](#client) before this section. Support for OAuth on the client is
> very similar for both OAuth 1 and OAuth 2 and general principles are valid for both OAuth versions as such.
>
> OAuth 2 support is in a
> [Beta](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/Beta.html) state
> and as such the API is subject to change.

To add support for Jersey OAuth 2 Client API into your application, add the following dependency to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.glassfish.jersey.security</groupId>
    <artifactId>oauth2-client</artifactId>
    <version>2.31</version>
</dependency>
```

OAuth 2, in contrast with OAuth 1, is not a strictly defined protocol, rather a framework. OAuth 2 specification defines
many extension points and it is up to service providers to implement. Additionally, OAuth 2 defines more than one
authorization flow. The authorization flow similar to the flow from OAuth 1 is called the
***Authorization Code Grant Flow***. This is the flow currently supported by Jersey (Jersey currently does not support
other flows). Please refer to the [OAuth 2.0 specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749) for more details about
authorization flows. ***Another significant change compared to OAuth 1 is that OAuth 2 is not based on signatures and
secret keys and therefore for most of the communication SSL needs to be used (i.e. the requests must be made through
HTTPS). This means that all OAuth 2 endpoint URIs must use the https scheme***.

Due to the fact that OAuth 2 does not define a strict protocol, it is not possible to provide a single, universal
pre-configured tool interoperable with all providers. Jersey OAuth 2 APIs allows a lot of extensibility via parameters
sent in each requests. Jersey currently provides two pre-configured authorization flow providers - for Google and
Facebook. 

The most important entry points of Jersey client OAuth 2 API and SPI are explained below:

* ***[OAuth2ClientSupport](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth2/OAuth2ClientSupport.html)*** -
  The main class which contains builder methods to build features that enable the OAuth 2 support. Start with this class
  every time you need to add any OAuth 2 support to the Jersey Client (build an Authorization flow or initialize client
  to perform authenticated requests). The class contains also methods to get authorization flow utilities adjusted for
  Facebook or Google.
* ***[OAuth2CodeGrantFlow](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth2/OAuth2CodeGrantFlow.html)*** -
  API that allows to perform the authorization flow defined as ***Authorization Code Grant Flow*** in the OAuth 2
  specification. Implementation of this interface is a class that is used as a standalone utility and is not part of the
  JAX-RS client. In other words, this is not a feature that should be registered into the client.
* ***[ClientIdentifier](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth2/ClientIdentifier.html)*** -
  Identifier of the client issued by the Service Provider for the client. Similar to
  [ConsumerCredentials](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth1/ConsumerCredentials.html)
  from OAuth 1 client support.
* ***[OAuth2Parameters](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth2/OAuth2Parameters.html)*** -
  Defines parameters that are used in requests during the authorization flow. These parameters can be used to override
  some of the parameters used in different authorization phases.
* ***[TokenResult](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/jersey.github.io/apidocs/snapshot/jersey/org/glassfish/jersey/client/oauth2/TokenResult.html)*** -
  Contains result of the authorization flow. One of the result values is the Access Token. It can additionally contain
  the expiration time of the Access Token and Refresh Token that can be used to get new Access Token.
  
The principle of performing the authorization flow with Jersey is similar to OAuth 1. Check the
[OAuth 1 Twitter Client Example](https://github.com/eclipse-ee4j/jersey/tree/master/examples/oauth-client-twitter) which
utilizes Jersey client support for OAuth 2 to get Google Tasks of the user. The application is a web application that
uses redirection to forward the user to the authorization URI.

The following code is an example of how to build and use OAuth 2 authorization flow.

```java
OAuth2CodeGrantFlow.Builder builder = OAuth2ClientSupport.authorizationCodeGrantFlowBuilder(
        clientId,
        "https://example.com/oauth/authorization",
        "https://example.com/oauth/token"
);
OAuth2CodeGrantFlow flow = builder
        .property(OAuth2CodeGrantFlow.Phase.AUTHORIZATION, "readOnly", "true")
        .scope("contact")
        .build();

String authorizationUri = flow.start();
 
// Here we must redirect the user to the authorizationUri and let the user approve an access for our app.
 
...
 
// We must handle redirection back to our web resource and extract code and state from the request

final TokenResult result = flow.finish(code, state);
System.out.println("Access Token: " + result.get);
```

In the code above we create an `OAuth2CodeGrantFlow` from an authorization URI and an access token URI. We have
additionally set a `readOnly` parameter to `true` and assigned the parameter to the authorization phase. This is the
way, how you can extend the standard flow with additional service provider-specific parameters. In this case, the
`readOnly=true` parameter will be added as a query parameter to the authorization uri returned from the method
`flow.start()`. If we would specify `ACCESS_TOKEN_REQUEST` as a phase, then the parameter would have been added to the
request when `flow.finish()` is invoked. See javadocs for more information. The parameter `readOnly` is not part of the
OAuth 2 specification and is used in the example for demonstration of how to configure the flow for needs of specific
service providers (in this case, the `readOnly` param would be described in the service provider's documentation).

Between the calls to `flow.start()` and `flow.finish()`, a user must be redirected to the authorization URI. This means
that the code will not be executed in a single method and the finish part will be invoked as a handler of redirect
request back to our web from authorization URI.
