---
layout: post
title: Sentry.io
tags: [Enterprise Application Monitorning]
color: rgb(250, 154, 133)
feature-img: "assets/img/pexels/design-art/christmas-around-corner.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/pexels/design-art/christmas-around-corner.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}

## Application Monitoring

### Customer Experience is Everything

For today's modern digital business, delivering superior performance and a great user experience at scale is just as
important as new functionality and features. This requires broad and deep application monitoring across every customer
journey.

With full stack monitoring powered by analytics, Application Monitoring helps teams understand how technology
performance impacts the business and its customers. Eliminating blind-spots and pinpointing problems– from front-end
apps to back-end business processes—and spanning modern networks and cloud services, CA solutions provide the rich
insights needed to power digital business.

### What is Application Monitoring?

Application monitoring is the process to ensure that software applications, systems and networks maintain the levels of
performance needed to support business outcomes. This process is used by DevOps practitioners to measure and evaluate
the performance of software application elements (from application to infrastructure) and as the primary means to
detect, triage and remediate performance issues. As application complexity increases, tools in this category also employ
analytics to reduce false-alarms, pinpoint anomalies and predict problems.

## Deploy sentry.io

### Option 1 - On-Premis


