---
layout: post
title: LXD
tags: [LXD, Virtualization, Linux, Container]
color: rgb(250, 154, 133)
feature-img: "assets/img/pexels/design-art/2020-08-16-25-jersey-cdi-container-agnostic-support/cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/pexels/design-art/2020-08-16-25-jersey-cdi-container-agnostic-support/cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}

## Install LXD

    sudo apt-add-repository ppa:ubuntu-lxc/stable
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get dist-upgrade
    sudo apt-get install lxd
    newgrp lxd
  
## Storage backends

LXD supports multiple kinds of storage backends. But it doesn't support moving existing containers or images between
different storage backends.

One storage backend is ZFS which supports all the features LXD needs to offer the fastest and most reliable container
experience. This includes per-container disk quotas, immediate snapshot/restore, optimized migration(send/receive) and
instant container creation from an image.

To use ZFS as storage backend, install it using

    sudo apt-add-repository ppa:zfs-native/stable
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install ubuntu-zfs
    
Next, configure LXD daemon to use ZFS

    sudo lxd init
    
The command above iteractively setup LXD and ZFS. In the example below, I'm simply using a sparse, loopback file for the
ZFS pool. Note that production servers might require different configurations.

    Name of the storage backend to use (dir or zfs): zfs
    Create a new ZFS pool (yes/no)? yes
    Name of the new ZFS pool: lxd
    Would you like to use an existing block device (yes/no)? no
    Size in GB of the new loop device (1GB minimum): 2
    Would you like LXD to be available over the network (yes/no)? no
    LXD has been successfully configured.
    
Now we can check the ZFS pool

    sudo zpool list
    sudo zpool status
    
## Managing Containers

### Create Container

LXD command line client comes with some official Ubuntu image sources. You can list them using this command

    lxc image list ubuntu:

To get the latest, tested, stable image of Ubuntu 14.04 LTS, for example, and name it

    lxc launch ubuntu:14.04 containerName
    
If you don't specify it, container will be assigned a random name. If you want a specific architecture, say a 32bit
Intel image, you can build a container with that image with

    lxc launch ubuntu:14.04/i386 container_name
    
### Listing Containers

    lxc list
    
lists all your containers with default displayed information. On systems with a lot of containers, displaying the
default result can be a bit slow(retrieve network information from the containers), you may instead want

    lxc list --fast
    
which shows a different set of columns that require less processing on the server side.

You can also filter based on name or properties.

    lxc list security.privileged=true
    
In this example, only containers that are privileged(user namespace disabled) are listed.

    lxc list --fast alpine
    
which lists only the containers that have “alpine” in their names(complex regular expressions are also supported).

### Details About a Container

    lxc info containerName
    
This command queries information about an specific container.

### Start Container

    lxc start containerName
    
### Stop Container

    lxc stop containerName (--force)
    
### Restart Container

    lxc restart containerName (--force)
    
### Pause Container

    lxc pause containerName
    
When a container is "paused", all the container tasks will be sent the equivalent of a SIGSTOP which means that they
will still be visible and will still be using memory but they won’t get any CPU time from the scheduler. This is useful
if you have a CPU hungry container that takes quite a while to start but that you aren’t constantly using. You can let
it start, then pause it, then start it again when needed.

### Delete Container

    lxc delete containerName
    
## ZFS

ZFS is a combination of logical volume manager and filesystem. Containers use it for their filesystem for the following
benefits

* snapshots
* copy-on-write cloning - "copy-on-write" means that everyone has a single shared copy of the same data until it's
  written, and then a copy is made. Usually, copy-on-write is used to resolve concurrency problems. In ZFS data blocks
  on disk of a container are allocated copy-on-write, a copy of this container shares the same data blocks. A copy of a
  block will be sent to the clone only if that block is modified in the original container. This reduces the number of
  new blocks that are to be allocated.
* continuous integrity checking against data corruption
* automatic repair
* efficient data compression
