---
layout: post
title: Architecture - Programming Paradigm
tags: [Software, Architecture]
category: FINALIZED
color: rgb(224, 1, 152)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/17-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/17-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The three paradigms included in this post are structured programming, object-orient programming, and functional
programming.

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}

## Structured Programming

### Understanding Structured Programing Through History

Structured Programming was Discovered by Edsger Wybe Dijkstra who, during the early year of programming, recogonized
that programming is hard, and that programmers don't do it very well. A program of any complexity contains too many
details for a human brain to manage without help. Overlooking just one small detail results in programs that may seem to
work, but fail in surprising ways.

Dijkstra's solution was to **apply the mathematical discipline of proof**. His vision was the construction of a
Euclidian hierarchy of postulates, theorems, corollaries, and lemmas. Dijkstra thought that programmers could use that
hierarchy the way mathematicians do. In other words, programmers would use proven structures, and tie them together with
code that they would then prove correct themselves.

During his investigation, Dijkstra discovered that _certain_ uses of `goto` statements prevent modules from being
decomposed recursively into smaller and smaller units, thereby preventing use of the divide-and-conquer approach
necessary for reasonable proofs.

Other uses of `goto`, however, did not have this problem. Dijkstra realized that these "good" uses of `goto`
corresponded to simple selection and iteration control structures such as `if`/`then`/`else` and `do`/`while`. Modules
that used only those kinds of control structures could be recursively subdivided into provable units.

The structured programming was born by the eliminatin of `goto` statement (this is why we never see `goto` syntax in
modern programming languages, such as Java). Nowadays we are all structured programmers, though not necessarily by
choice. It's just that our languages don’t give us the option to use undisciplined direct transfer of control.

### Functional Decomposition

Structured programming allows modules to be recursively decomposed into provable units, which in turn means that modules
can be functionally decomposed. That is, you can take a large-scale problem statement and decompose it into high-level
functions. Each of those functions can then be decomposed into lower-level functions. Moreover, each of those decomposed
functions can be represented using the restricted control structures of structured programming.

### Proving the Correctness of Structured Programming - Tests

A program can be proven incorrect by a test, but it cannot be proven correct. All that tests can do, after sufficient
testing effort, is to allow us to deem a program to be correct enough for our purposes.

Software development is not a mathematical endeavor (as with Dijkstra's pure-mathematical proposal), even though it
seems to manipulate mathematical constructs. Rather, software is like a science. **We show correctness by failing to
prove incorrectness, despite our best efforts**.

_Structured programming forces us to recursively decompose a program into a set of small provable functions. We can then
use tests to try to prove those small provable functions incorrect. If such tests fail to prove incorrectness, then we
deem the functions to be correct enough for our purposes_.

It is this ability to create falsifiable units of programming that makes structured programming valuable today. This is
the reason that modern languages do not typically support unrestrained `goto` statements. Moreover, **at the
architectural level, this is why we still consider functional decomposition to be one of our best practices. Software
architects strive to define modules, components, and services that are easily falsifiable (testable). To do so, they
employ restrictive disciplines similar to structured programming, albeit at a much higher level.

## Object-Oriented (OO) Programming

To the software architect OO is the ability, through the use of polymorphism, to gain absolute control over every source
code dependency in the system. It allows the architect to create a plugin architecture, in which modules that
contain high-level policies are independent of modules that contain low-level details. The low-level details are
relegated to plugin modules that can be deployed and developed independently from the modules that contain high-level
policies.

## Functional Programming

### Functional Programming Basics

Functional programming contains the following key concepts:

* Functions as first class objects
* Pure functions
* Higher order functions

Pure functional programming has a set of rules to follow too:

* No state
* No side effects
* Immutable variables
* Favour recursion over looping

Functional programming is not the right tool for every problem out there. Especially the idea of "no side effects" makes
it hard to e.g. write to a database (that is a side effect). You need to learn what problems functional programming is
good at solving, and which it is not.

### Functions as First Class Objects

In the functional programming paradigm, functions are first class objects in the language. That means that you can
create an "instance" of a function, as have a variable reference that function instance, just like a reference to a
String, Map or any other object. Functions can also be passed as parameters to other functions.

In Java, methods are not first class objects. The closest we get is Java Lambda Expressions.

### Pure Functions

A function is a pure function if:

* The execution of the function has no side effects.
* The return value of the function depends only on the input parameters passed to the function.

Here is an example of a pure function (method) in Java:

```java
public class ObjectWithPureFunction{

    public int sum(int a, int b) {
        return a + b;
    }
}
```

Contrarily, here is an example of a non-pure function:

```java
public class ObjectWithNonPureFunction{
    private int value = 0;

    public int add(int nextValue) {
        this.value += nextValue;
        return this.value;
    }
}
```

### Higher Order Functions

A function is a higher order function if at least one of the following conditions are met:

* The function takes one or more functions as parameters.
* The function returns another function as result.

For example

```java
public interface IFactory<T> {
    T create();
}
```

```java
public interface IProducer<T> {
    T produce();
}
```

```java
public interface IConfigurator<T> {
    void configure(T t);
}
```

```java
public class HigherOrderFunctionClass {

    public <T> IFactory<T> createFactory(IProducer<T> producer, IConfigurator<T> configurator) {
        return () -> {
           T instance = producer.produce();
           configurator.configure(instance);
           return instance;
        }
    }
}
```

### No State

"No state" is means no state external to the function. A function may have local variables containing temporary state
internally, but the function cannot reference any member variables of the class or object the function belongs to.

Here is an example of a function that uses no external state:

```java
public class Calculator {

    public int sum(int a, int b) {
        return a + b;
    }
}
```

Contrarily, here is an example of a function that uses external state:

```java
public class Calculator {

    private int initVal = 5;

    public int sum(int a) {
        return initVal + a;
    }
}
```

### No Side Effects

Another rule in the functional programming paradigm is that of no side effects. This means, that a function cannot
change any state outside of the function. Changing state outside of a function is referred to as a _side effect_.

State outside of a function refers both to member variables in the class, and member variables inside parameters to the
functions, or state in external systems like file systems or databases.

### Immutable Variables

A third rule in the functional programming paradigm is that of immutable variables. Immutable variables makes it easier
to avoid side effects.
