---
layout: post
title: The Importance of Protocols and Standards
tags: [Protocol, Standard, Network]
color: rgb(250, 154, 133)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/23-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/23-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

If you were to meet the Queen, for example, you would be expected to follow protocol. You would be expected, for
example, to call her Ma'am' or 'Your Majesty'. You might be expected to bow and to dress appropriately as well. A set of
rules that you have to follow is known as a 'protocol'. Computers make use of protocols as well, to enable them to
communicate.

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}

## Protocols

Devices need to communicate. For example, a printer needs to send messages to a computer telling it that it has run out
of paper or that it is ready to print while a computer needs to send the data it wants to print to the printer.
Computers need to send data between themselves so that, for example, email can be exchanged and the Internet can
function. When two devices want to successfully communicate, they must agree to follow some rules about the way they
will do it. These are known as protocols.

A communications protocol is the phrase used to describe a set of rules that communication equipment adhere to when they
send data to each other. If two devices are sending and receiving data but using different rules then the receiving
device will not understand what was sent! A communications protocol needs to specify a range of things before successful
communication can take place. These include:

* What baud rate will be used.
* What parity checking will be used.
* Whether software or hardware ‘handshaking’ is to be used.
* What character set is to be used.
* How many bits will be used for data.
* How many control bits will be used to control data transfer.

## The Importance of Standards in Communication between Computers 

Setting standards, rules that all manufacturers of hardware and software will follow, are important for a number of
reasons:

* Standards describe accurately and unambiguously how information is transmitted.
* A software component (such as frontend) will work successfully with other software components (such as backend) if
  they all follow the same standards.
* By defining a set of standards, you are providing a framework within which all components can design new, successful
  ones.
* Standards break down complex ideas into smaller, methodical, easier-to-understand components.

Because communications protocols are so important, a special organisation known as the ITU, or International
Telecommunications Union, exists to lay down the exact detail in the standards that everyone will use. They define the
protocols. The two basic protocols used on the Internet are IP (Internet Protocol) and TCP (Transmission Control
Protocol). Together, they are referred to as the TCP/IP. TCP/IP controls how information is successfully transferred
between computers on the Internet. When web pages are requested and then sent over the Internet, another protocol used
in addition to TCP/IP is the http protocol, or Hyper Text Transfer Protocol. When files are transferred over the
Internet, the FTP protocol, or File Transfer Protocol, is used. Sending email can be done using the SMTP, or Simple Mail
Transfer Protocol.
