---
layout: post
title: GNU Makefile
tags: [Project Packaging, Makefile]
color: rgb(85, 85, 187)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/14-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/14-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

## Writing Makefiles

### What Makefiles Contain

Makefiles have 5 components

1. **Explicit Rules** specify when and how to remake one or more files, the rule's targets. It lists the 
   other files that the targets depend on, the prerequisites of the target, and may also give a recipe to use to create
   or update the targets. 
2. **Implicit Rules** specify when and how to remake a class of files based on their names. It describes how a target
   may depend on a file with a name similar to the target and gives a recipe to create or update such a target.
3. **Variable Definitions** are lines that specifies a text string value for a variable that can be substituted into the 
   text later.
4. **Directives** are instructions for `make` to do something special while reading the Makefile. These include:
   - Reading another Makefile
   - Deciding (based on the values of variables) whether to use or ignore a part of the Makefile
   - Defining a variable from a verbatim string containing multiple lines 
5. **Comments** which starts with "#"

### Splitting Long Lines

Makefiles use a "line-based" syntax in which **the newline character marks the end of a statement**. However, it is 
difficult to read lines which are too long. We could, however, escape the internal newlines with a backslash (`\`)
character.

### Including Other Makefiles

The **`include`** directive suspends reading the current Makefile and reads one or more other Makefiles before
continuing. The directive is a line in the Makefile that looks like this: 

```makefile
include <filename1> <filename2> ...
```

`<filename>` can contain shell file name patterns. If `<filename1> <filename2> ...` is empty, nothing is included.

Extra spaces are allowed and ignored at the beginning of the line, **but the first character must not be a tab (or the 
value of `.RECIPEPREFIX`). If the line begins with a tab, it will be considered a recipe line. Whitespace is required 
between include and the file names, and between file names; extra whitespace is ignored there and at the end of the 
directive. A comment starting with `#` is allowed at the end of the line. If the file names contain any variable or 
function references, they are expanded

For example, if you have three `.mk` files, `a.mk`, `b.mk`, and `c.mk`, and `$(bar)` expands to `bish bash`, then the 
following expression

```makefile
include foo *.mk $(bar)
```

is evaluates to 

```makefile
include foo a.mk b.mk c.mk bish bash
```

When `make` processes an include directive, it suspends reading of the containing Makefile and reads listed file in
turn. When they are finished, `make` resumes reading the Makefile in which the directive appears. 

**One occasion for using include directives is when several programs, handled by individual Makefiles in various
directories, need to use a common set of variable definitions or pattern rules**



## How to Use Variables

### Setting Variables

To set a variable, write a line starting with the variable name followed by `=`, `:=`, or `::=`. Whatever follows the
`=`, `:=`, or `::=` on the line becomes the value. For example,

```makefile
objects = main.o foo.o bar.o utils.o
```



