---
layout: post
title: JSR 330 Specification
tags: [Jersey, Dependency Injection]
category: FINALIZED
color: rgb(8, 86, 112)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/30-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/30-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}

JSR 330 is the Dependency Injection for Java. It is a standard Java package called `javax.inject`, which specifies a
means for obtaining objects in such a way as to _maximize reusability, testability and maintainability_ compared to 
traditional approaches such as constructors, factories, and service locators (e.g., JNDI). This process, known as 
**dependency injection**, is beneficial to most nontrivial applications.

Many types depend on other types. For example, a `Stopwatch` might depend on a `TimeSource`. The types on which a type 
depends are known as its **dependencies**. The process of finding an instance of a dependency to use at run time is
known as **resolving the dependency**. If no such instance can be found, the dependency is said to be **unsatisfied**,
and the application is broken.

In the absence of dependency injection, an object can resolve its dependencies in a few ways. It can invoke a
constructor, hard-wiring an object directly to its dependency's implementation and life cycle:

```java
class Stopwatch {

    final TimeSource timeSource;
    
    Stopwatch () {
        timeSource = new AtomicClock(...); 
    }
    
    void start() { ... }
    long stop() { ... }
}
```

If more flexibility is needed, the object can call out to a factory or service locator:

```java
class Stopwatch {     
    
    final TimeSource timeSource;
    
    Stopwatch () {
        timeSource = DefaultTimeSource.getInstance(); 
    }
    
    void start() { ... }
    long stop() { ... }
   }
```

In deciding between these traditional approaches to dependency resolution, a programmer must make trade-offs.
Constructors are more concise but restrictive. Factories decouple the client and implementation to some extent but
require boilerplate code. Service locators decouple even further but reduce compile time type safety. All three
approaches inhibit unit testing. For example, if the programmer uses a factory, each test against code that depends on
the factory will have to mock out the factory and remember to clean up after itself or else risk side effects:

```java
    void testStopwatch() {
        TimeSource original = DefaultTimeSource.getInstance();
        DefaultTimeSource.setInstance(new MockTimeSource());

        try {
            // Now, we can actually test Stopwatch.
            Stopwatch sw = new Stopwatch();
            ...
        } finally {
            DefaultTimeSource.setInstance(original);
        }
   }
```

In practice, supporting this ability to mock out a factory results in even more boilerplate code. Tests that mock out
and clean up after multiple dependencies quickly get out of hand. To make matters worse, a programmer must predict 
accurately how much flexibility will be needed in the future or else suffer the consequences. If a programmer initially 
elects to use a constructor but later decides that more flexibility is required, the programmer must replace every call
to the constructor. If the programmer errs on the side of caution and write factories up front, it may result in a lot
of unnecessary boilerplate code, adding noise, complexity, and error-proneness.

Dependency injection addresses all of these issues. Instead of the programmer calling a constructor or factory, a tool 
called a **dependency injector** passes dependencies to objects:

```java
class Stopwatch {
    
    final TimeSource timeSource;
    
    @Inject
    Stopwatch(TimeSource TimeSource) {
        this.TimeSource = TimeSource;
    }
    
    void start() { ... }
    long stop() { ... }
}
```

The injector further passes dependencies to other dependencies until it constructs the entire object graph. For example, 
suppose the programmer asked an injector to create a `StopwatchWidget` instance:

```java
/** GUI for a Stopwatch */
class StopwatchWidget {
    
    @Inject
    StopwatchWidget(Stopwatch sw) {
        ...
    }
    
    ...
}
```

The injector might:

1. Find a `TimeSource`
2. Construct a `Stopwatch` with the `TimeSource`
3. Construct a `StopwatchWidget` with the `Stopwatch`

This leaves the programmer's code clean, flexible, and relatively free of dependency-related infrastructure.

In unit tests, the programmer can now construct objects directly (without an injector) and pass in mock dependencies.
The programmer no longer needs to set up and tear down factories or service locators in each test. This greatly
simplifies our unit test:

```java
void testStopwatch() {
    Stopwatch sw = new Stopwatch(new MockTimeSource());
    ...
}
```

The total decrease in unit-test complexity is proportional to the product of the number of unit tests and the number of 
dependencies.

**JSR 330 source code provides dependency injection annotations that enable portable classes**, but it leaves external 
dependency configuration up to the injector implementation. Programmers annotate constructors, methods, and fields to 
advertise their injectability (constructor injection is demonstrated in the examples above). A dependency injector 
identifies a class's dependencies by inspecting these annotations, and injects the dependencies at run time. Moreover,
the injector can verify that all dependencies have been satisfied at _build time_. A service locator, by contrast,
cannot detect unsatisfied dependencies until run time.

Injector implementations can take many forms. An injector could configure itself using XML, annotations, a DSL 
(domain-specific language), or even plain Java code. An injector could rely on reflection or code generation. An
injector that uses compile-time code generation may not even have its own run time representation. Other injectors may
not be able to generate code at all, neither at compile nor run time. A "container", for some definition, can be an 
injector, but JSR 330 specification aims to minimize restrictions on injector implementations.

## @Inject

```java
@Target({ METHOD, CONSTRUCTOR, FIELD })
@Retention(RUNTIME)
@Documented
public @interface Inject {
    
}
```

This annotation identifies injectable constructors, methods, and fields. It may apply to static as well as instance 
members. An injectable member may have any access modifier (private, package-private, protected, public). Constructors
are injected first, followed by fields, and then methods. Fields and methods in superclasses are injected before those
in subclasses. Ordering of injection among fields and among methods in the same class is not specified.

### Injectable Constructors

Injectable constructors are annotated with `@Inject` and accept zero or more dependencies as arguments. `@Inject` can 
apply to at most one constructor per class.

    @Inject
    ConstructorModifiersopt SimpleTypeName(FormalParameterListopt) Throwsopt ConstructorBody

`@Inject` is optional for public, no-argument constructors when no other constructors are present. This enables 
injectors to invoke default constructors.

    @Injectopt
    Annotationsopt public SimpleTypeName() Throwsopt ConstructorBody

### Injectable Fields

* are annotated with `@Inject`.
* _are not final_.
* may have any otherwise valid name.


    @Inject FieldModifiersopt Type VariableDeclarator

### Injectable Methods

* are annotated with `@Inject`.
* are not abstract.
* do not declare type parameters of their own.
* may return a result
* may have any otherwise valid name.
* accept zero or more dependencies as arguments.


    @Inject MethodModifiersopt ResultType Identifier(FormalParameterListopt) Throwsopt MethodBody

The injector ignores the result of an injected method, but non-void return types are allowed to support use of the
method in other contexts (builder-style method chaining, for example).

> ⚠️ A method annotated with `@Inject` that overrides another method annotated with `@Inject` will only be injected
> once per injection request per instance. A method with no `@Inject` annotation that overrides a method annotated with 
> `@Inject` will not be injected.

### Example

```java
    public class Car { 
    
    // Injectable constructor
    @Inject
    public Car(Engine engine) {
        ...
    }
    
    // Injectable field
    @Inject
    private Provider<Seat> seatProvider;

    // Injectable package-private method
    @Inject
    void install(Windshield windshield, Trunk trunk) {
        ...
    }
}
```

Injection of members annotated with `@Inject` is required. While an injectable member may use any accessibility modifier 
(including private), platform or injector limitations (like security restrictions or lack of reflection support) might 
preclude injection of non-public members.

### Qualifiers

A [qualifier](#qualifier) may annotate an injectable field or parameter and, combined with the type, identify the 
implementation to inject. Qualifiers are optional, and when used with `@Inject` in injector-independent classes, no more 
than one qualifier should annotate a single field or parameter. The qualifiers are bold in the following example:

```java
public class Car {
    
    @Inject
    @Leather
    private Provider<Seat> seatProvider;
    
    @Inject
    void install(
            @Tinted Windshield windshield, 
            @Big Trunk trunk
    ) {
        ...
    }
}
```

> ⚠️ If one injectable method overrides another, the overriding method's parameters do not automatically inherit
> qualifiers from the overridden method's parameters.

### Injectable Values

For a given type `T` and optional qualifier, an injector must be able to inject a user-specified class that:

* is assignment compatible with T and
* has an injectable constructor.

For example, the user might use external configuration to pick an implementation of `T`. Beyond that, which values are 
injected depend upon the injector implementation and its configuration.

### Circular Dependencies

Detecting and resolving circular dependencies is left as an exercise for the injector implementation. Circular 
dependencies between two constructors is an obvious problem, but you can also have a circular dependency between 
injectable fields or methods:

```java
class A {
    
    @Inject
    B b;
}

class B {
    
     @Inject
     A a;
}
```

When constructing an instance of `A`, a naive injector implementation might go into an infinite loop constructing an 
instance of `B` to set on `A`, a second instance of `A` to set on `B`, a second instance of `B` to set on the second 
instance of `A`, and so on.

A conservative injector might detect the circular dependency at build time and generate an error, at which point the 
programmer could break the circular dependency by injecting [`Provider<A>`](#provider) or `Provider<B>` instead of `A`
or `B` respectively. Calling `get()` on the provider directly from the constructor or method it was injected into
defeats the provider's ability to break up circular dependencies. In the case of method or field injection, scoping one
of the dependencies (using [singleton scope](#singleton), for example) may also enable a valid circular relationship.

## @Qualifier

```java
@Target(ANNOTATION_TYPE)
@Retention(RUNTIME)
@Documented
public @interface Qualifier { }
```

For a given bean type, there may be multiple beans which implement the type. For example, an application may have two 
implementations of the interface `PaymentProcessor`:

```java
class SynchronousPaymentProcessor implements PaymentProcessor {
    
    ... 
}
```

```java
class AsynchronousPaymentProcessor implements PaymentProcessor {
    
    ... 
}
```

A client that needs a `PaymentProcessor` that processes payments synchronously needs some way to distinguish between the 
two different implementations. One approach would be for the client to explicitly specify the class that implements the 
`PaymentProcessor` interface. However, this approach creates a hard dependence between client and implementation -
exactly what use of the interface was designed to avoid!

A **qualifier type** represents some client-visible semantic associated with a type that is satisfied by some 
implementations of the type (and not by others). For example, we could introduce qualifier types representing 
synchronicity and asynchronicity. In Java code, qualifier types are represented by annotations.

```java
@Synchronous
class SynchronousPaymentProcessor implements PaymentProcessor {
    
    ... 
}
```

```java
@Asynchronous
class AsynchronousPaymentProcessor implements PaymentProcessor {
    
    ... 
}
```

Finally, qualifier types are applied to injection points to distinguish which implementation is required by the client. 
For example, when the container encounters the following injected field, an instance of `SynchronousPaymentProcessor`
will be injected:

```java
@Inject
@Synchronous
PaymentProcessor paymentProcessor;
````

But in this case, an instance of `AsynchronousPaymentProcessor` will be injected:

```java
@Inject
@Asynchronous
PaymentProcessor paymentProcessor;
```

Anyone can define a new qualifier. A qualifier annotation:

* is annotated with `@Qualifier`, `@Retention(RUNTIME)`, and typically `@Documented`.
* can have attributes.
* **may be part of the public API, much like the dependency type, but unlike implementation types which needn't be part
  of the public API**.
* may have restricted usage if annotated with @Target. While this specification covers applying qualifiers to fields and 
  parameters only, some injector configurations might use qualifier annotations in other places (on methods or classes
  for example).

### Example

```java
@java.lang.annotation.Documented
@java.lang.annotation.Retention(RUNTIME)
@javax.inject.Qualifier
public @interface Leather {
    
    Color color() default Color.TAN;
    
    public enum Color {
        RED,
        BLACK,
        TAN
    }
}
```

## @Named

```java
@Qualifier
@Documented
@Retention(RUNTIME)
public @interface Named {
    
    /** The name. */
    String value() default "";
}
```

String-based [qualifier](#qualifier).

## Provider

```java
public interface Provider<T> {
    
    T get();
}
```

Provides instances of `T`. Typically implemented by an injector. For any type `T` that can be injected, you can also 
inject `Provider<T>`. Compared to injecting `T` directly, injecting `Provider<T>` enables:

* retrieving multiple instances.
* lazy or optional retrieval of an instance.
* breaking circular dependencies.
* abstracting scope so you can look up an instance in a smaller scope from an instance in a containing scope.

### Example

```java
class Car { 
    
    @Inject
    Car(Provider<Seat> seatProvider) { 
        Seat driver = seatProvider.get();
        Seat passenger = seatProvider.get();
        
        ...
    }
}
```

## @Scope

```java
@Target(ANNOTATION_TYPE)
@Retention(RUNTIME)
@Documented
public @interface Scope { }
```

A scope annotation applies to a class containing an injectable constructor and governs how the injector reuses instances 
of the type. By default, if no scope annotation is present, the injector creates an instance (by injecting the type's 
constructor), uses the instance for one injection, and then forgets it. If a scope annotation is present, the injector
may retain the instance for possible reuse in a later injection. **If multiple threads can access a scoped instance, its 
implementation should be thread safe**. The implementation of the scope itself is left up to the injector.

In the following example, the scope annotation [`@Singleton`](#singleton) ensures that we only have one Log instance:

```java
@Singleton
class Log {
    
    void log(String message) {
        ...
    }
}
```

The injector generates an error if it encounters more than one scope annotation on the same class or a scope annotation
it doesn't support.

A scope annotation:

* is annotated with `@Scope`, `@Retention(RUNTIME)`, and typically `@Documented`.
* should not have attributes.
* is typically not `@Inherited`, so scoping is [orthogonal](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3272019/is-java-orthogonal#:~:text=Orthogonality%20means%20that%20features%20can,with%20which%20it%20is%20combined.) to implementation inheritance.
* may have restricted usage if annotated with `@Target`. While this specification covers applying scopes to classes
  only, some injector configurations might use scope annotations in other places (on factory method results for
  example).

### Example

```java
@java.lang.annotation.Documented
@java.lang.annotation.Retention(RUNTIME)
@javax.inject.Scope
public @interface RequestScoped { }
```

Annotating scope annotations with `@Scope` helps the injector detect the case where a programmer used the scope
annotation on a class but forgot to configure the scope in the injector. A conservative injector would generate an error 
rather than not apply a scope.

## @Singleton

Identifies a type that the injector only instantiates once. Not inherited.
