---
layout: post
title: Building Repository Management Infrastructure
tags: [CD/CD]
category: FINALIZED
color: rgb(27, 185, 115)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/29-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/29-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The proliferation of different repository formats and tools accessing them as well as the emergence of more publicly
available repositories has triggered the need to manage access and usage of these repositories and the components they
contain

<!--more-->

Hosting our private repositories for internal components has proven to be a very efficient methodology to exchange
components during all phases of the software development lifecycle. It is considered a best practice at this stage.

The task of managing all the repositories a development teams interact with can be supported by the use of a dedicated
server application - a **repository manager**. To put it simply, a repository manager provides two core features:

1. **the ability of proxying a remote repository and cache components saving both bandwidth and time required to
   retrieve a software component from a remote repository repeatedly**
2. **the ability of hosting a repository providing an organization with a deployment target for internal software
   components**

Just as Source Code Management (SCM) tools are designed to manage source code, repository managers have been designed to
manage and trace external dependencies and components generated by internal build. 

Repository managers are an essential part of any enterprise or open-source software development effort and they enable
greater collaboration between developers and wider distribution of software by facilitating the exchange and usage of
binary components. 

When we install a repository manager, we are bringing the power of a repository like the Central Repository into our
organization. We can use it to proxy the Central Repositories and other repositories, and host our own repositories for
internal and external use. 

In addition to the two aforementioned core features, a repository manager can support the following use cases

* allows us to manage binary software components through the software development lifecycle
* search and catalogue software components
* control component releases with rules and add automated notifications
* integrate with external security systems, such as LDAP
* manage component metadata
* control access to components and repositories
* display component dependencies
* brose component archive contents

Using a repository manager provides a number of benefits, including

* improved software build performance due to faster component download off the local repository manager
* reduced bandwidth usage due to component caching
* higher predictability and scalability due to limited dependency on external repositories
* increased understanding of component usage due to centralized storage of all used components
* simplified developer configuration due to central access configuration to remote repositories and components on the
  repository manager
* unified method to provide components to consumer reducing complexity overheads
* improved collaboration due to the simplified exchange of binary components

* TOC
{:toc}


Nexus Repository Manager OSS
----------------------------

### Concepts

The Nexus Repository Manager OSS is all about working with **components** and **repositories**.

#### Components

A component is a resource like a library or a framework that is used as part of a software application at run-time,
integration or unit test execution time or required as part of build process. It could be an entire application or a
static resource like an image.

Typically these components are archives of a large variety of files, such as Java bytecode in class files, text files,
or binary files such as images, PDFs, and music files. The archives have numerous formats such as JAR, WAR, ZIP, NPM
packages, or .sh

Components can be composed of multiple, nested components themselves. For example, consider a Java web application
packaged as a WAR component. It contains a number of JAR components and a number of JavaScript libraries. All of these
are standalone components in other contexts and happend to be included as part of the WAR component.

Components provide all the building blocks and features that allow a development team to create powerful applications
by assembling them and adding their own business related components to create a full-fledged, powerful application.

Components, in other tool-chains, are called artifacts, packages, bundles, archives, and other terms. The concept and
idea, however, remain the same and component is used as the independent, generic term.

#### Repository

A wide variety of components exists and more are continuously created by the open source community as well as
proprietary vendors. These are libraries and frameworks written in various languages on different platforms that are
used for application development every day. It has become a default pattern to build applications by combining the
features of multiple components with our own custom components containing our application code to create an application
for a specific domain

In order to ease the consumption and usage of components, they are aggregated into collection of components. These are
called **repositories** and are typically available on the internet as a service. On different platforms terms such as
registry and others are used for the same concept. 

Examples for such repositories are

* the Central Repository, also known as Maven Central
* the NuGet Gallery
* RubyGems.org
* npmjs.org

Components in these repositories are accessed by numerous tools including

* package managers like npm, nuget or gem
* build tools such as Maven, Gradle, rake or grunt
* IDE's such as Eclipse and IntelliJ

#### Repository Format

The different repositories use different technologies to store and expose the components in them to client tools. This
defines a repository format and as such is closely related to the tools interacting with the repository.

For example, the Maven repository format relies on a specific directory structure defined by the identifiers of the
components and a number of XML formatted files for metadata. Component interaction is performed via plain HTTP commands
and some additional custom interaction with the XML files. 

Other repositories formats use database for storage and REST API interactions, or different directory structures wit
format specific files for the metadata

### Install on EKS

To be continues...
