---
layout: post
title: Web3: X
tags: [Web3]
category: FINALIZED
color: rgb(255, 105, 132)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/19-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/19-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The dominance of big tech over internet use and its control over personal data has led calls for the net's
decentralization. The third iteration of the internet, Web 3.0, will be defined by open-source technology, utilizing 
blockchain technology to be trustless and permissionless. Web 3.0 is still in its infancy and there are still large 
questions to address.


<!--more-->

As the internet has evolved, its influence on us has been profound, shaping everything from what we read, the products
we purchase, the entertainment we watch and how we communicate. It seems to know everything about us - our likes,
dislikes, friends, shopping habits and favourite cat videos.

This intimate knowledge could be inferred as good or bad. You can be targeted with advertisements for products you
didn't know you wanted and be suggested news articles you didn't know you wanted to read. This personalization can be 
convenient but also invasive.

There are concerns abound over who has access to and controls this personal information. Big tech has increasingly come 
under fire for their use and potential abuse of personal data, combined with their large influence over the internet
based on their market dominance. As of 2019, 43% of total net traffic flows through Google (Alphabet), Amazon, Meta 
(previously Facebook), Netflix, Microsoft and Apple.

This dominance is more acute within their primary categories, with Google controlling almost 87% of the global search 
market and Meta reaching 3.6 billion unique users across its four major platforms (Facebook, Whatsapp, Messenger and 
Instagram).

* TOC
{:toc}


Reclaiming Big Tech's Power
---------------------------

Web3 is a new iteration of the internet that harnesses blockchain to "decentralize" management thus reducing the control
of big corporations, such as Google or Meta, and making it more democratic. It is defined by open-source software, is 
trustless - doesn’t require the support of a trusted intermediary - and is permissionless (it has no governing body).

Web3 draws its named as the third iteration of the internet. The first iteration of the internet consisted of
**read-only, static webpages** (view a
[BBC homepage from August 2000](https://web.archive.org/web/20000520021151/http:/www.bbc.co.uk/) as an example). Web 2.0 
added the ability to **interact with and produce content**, making activities such as social media and online banking
and shopping possible.

The concept of Web3 has been around for over half a decade, originally coined by Ethereum co-founder Gavin Wood in 2014.
It gained traction, however, in 2021 with the proliferation of blockchain technologies, expanding [NFT][NFT] markets, 
venture capital investments and ongoing calls to reign in the power of big tech.


Web3 Rise in Practice
---------------------

The current internet, Web 2.0, relies on systems and servers owned largely by big corporations, raising concerns over 
system vulnerability and control. When Meta’s associated platforms suffered a global outage in early October -
exacerbated by the centralization of its servers - there were calls to adopt Web3 and its decentralized architecture.

Proponents of adopting Web3 also advocate for internet activity to be governed by the many rather than the incentives
and biases of the few. After all, why should large corporations control our data?

In a Web3 world, activities and data would be hosted on a network of computers using blockchain rather than corporate 
servers. The internet would likely have the same look and feel, at least initially, but your internet activities would
be represented by your crypto-wallet and websites hosted through decentralized applications (dapps), digital
applications run on a blockchain network.

The definition of Web3 can differ by source; however, some consistent features will likely be embedded into the system:

### Anonymous Single-Sign-On

Anonymous single-sign-on will allow one username and authentication method across all websites and accounts, rather than 
individual logins for each site. This login would not require you to relinquish control of sensitive personal data.

This feature differs from current Facebook or Google single-sign-on, which grants access to your personal data until you 
revoke this access. However, all transactions on the blockchain are public, so technically, everyone can see the assets
and data assigned to a specific wallet. This transparency is also why wallets are anonymous, identified only by an
address, not a name unless the individual chooses to assign personal details to their wallet(s).

### Individual Ownership and Tokenization

Activities that contribute to Web3 are rewarded by a token (either [NFT][NFT] or fungible, e.g. cryptocurrency) to 
incentivize participation and distribute ownership.

For example, when posting a new social message, an [NFT][NFT] representing that post would be "minted" (generated) and 
stored as an asset in a crypto-wallet. This token represents ownership over the message, which can then be traded with 
others via their wallets. If the post is popular, the returns will go to the token owner rather than to the platform
it's hosted on.

### Self-Governing

Along with the distribution of ownership is the distribution of decision-making power. Without a central authority, 
blockchains rely on the entire network to verify an activity via consensus. However, specific systems, such as those
used in decentralized autonomous organizations can be established to democratize decision-making based on the quality or 
volume of a user's investment into a site or dapp.

For example, based on their share of ownership of a platform, users can vote on the rules that govern a site (e.g. what 
classifies as misinformation). These rules are then executed by **smart contracts**.


[NFT]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-fungible_token
