---
layout: post
title: What happens when you eliminate test and QA? Fewer errors and faster development, say Yahoo's tech leaders
tags: [Software Engineering]
category: MANAGEMENT
color: rgb(92, 1, 203)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/24-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/24-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

In 2014 Yahoo eliminated its test and quality assurance team, as part of project Warp Drive, its move to continuous 
delivery of code. The shift wasn't easy, Yahoo tech execs say, and required some "tough parenting." But the result has 
been fewer errors because "when you have humans everywhere, checking this, checking that, they add so much human error 
into the chain that, when you take them out, even if you fail sometimes, overall you are doing better." And the pain 
wasn't as great as expected

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}


Yahoo's Engineers Move to Coding Without a Net
----------------------------------------------

What happens when you take away the quality assurance team in a software development operation? Fewer, not more errors, 
along with a vastly quicker development cycle.

That, at least, has been the experience at Yahoo, according to Amotz Maimon, the company's chief architect, and Jay 
Rossiter, senior vice president of science and technology. After some small changes in development processes in 2013,
and a larger push from mid-2014 to the first quarter of 2015, software engineering at Yahoo underwent a sea change. The 
effort was part of a program Yahoo calls Warp Drive: a shift from batch releases of code to a system of continuous 
delivery. Software engineers at Yahoo are no longer permitted to hand off their completed code to another team for cross 
checking. Instead, the code goes live as-is; if it has problems, it will fail and shut down systems, directly affecting 
Yahoo's customers.

"Doing that," Rossiter said, "caused a paradigm shift in how engineers thought about problems." It has also, he said, 
forced engineers to develop tools to automate the kinds of checks previously handled by teams of humans. An engineer
might go through an arduous process of checking code once - but then would start building tools to automate that
process.

The shift wasn't easy, Rossiter recalled. It required some tough parenting, with no exceptions, he says. "People would
come in and say I'm special, I'm working in UI, I'm on the back end, I'm this, I'm that." But by consistently refusing
to give any concessions, it forced a rethink. "We said 'No more training wheels,' and it made a huge difference. We
forced excellence into the process."

"It was not without pain," Maimon says - though the problems were not as big as he feared. "We expected that things
would break, and we would have to fix them. But the error that had been introduced by humans in the loop was larger than 
what was exposed by the new system."

"It turns out," Rossiter chimed in, "that when you have humans everywhere, checking this, checking that, they add so
much human error into the chain that, when you take them out, even if you fail sometimes, overall you are doing better."

A year after the change, "It's 100 percent working," Maimon says. "It's amazing. Even people who didn't think it could
ever work now think it's great, and we are applying it to everything we do in the company."
