---
layout: post
title: Blockchain 101
tags: [Blockchain]
category: FINALIZED
color: rgb(19, 169, 82)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/19-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/19-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

This post explains Blockchain in context of Bitcoin and, by generalizing the technique, discusses blockchain in a
broader term on its applications, i.e. those applications that deal with the concept of decentralization.

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}


The Origin - Solving Double Spend Problem
-----------------------------------------

Commerce on the Internet has come to rely almost exclusively on financial institutions serving as trusted third parties
to process electronic payments. While the system works well enough for most transactions, it still suffers from the 
inherent weaknesses of the trust based model. Completely non-reversible transactions are not really possible, since 
financial institutions cannot avoid mediating disputes. The cost of mediation increases transaction costs, limiting the
minimum practical transaction size and cutting off the possibility for small casual transactions, and there is a broader 
cost in the loss of ability to make non-reversible payments for nonreversible services. With the possibility of
reversal, the need for trust spreads. Merchants must be wary of their customers, hassling them for more information than 
they would otherwise need. A certain percentage of fraud is accepted as unavoidable. These costs and payment
uncertainties can be avoided in person by using physical currency, but no mechanism exists to make payments over a 
communications channel without a trusted party.

What is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing 
parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted third party. Transactions that are 
computationally impractical to reverse would protect sellers from fraud, and routine escrow mechanisms could easily be 
implemented to protect buyers.

The famous "bitcoin" is a solution to such **double-spending problem** using a peer-to-peer distributed timestamp server
to generate computational proof of the chronological order of transactions. The system is secure as long as honest nodes 
collectively control more CPU power than any cooperating group of attacker nodes.

### What is the Double Spend Problem?

The Double Spend Problem describes the difficulty of ensuring digital money is not easily duplicated. Trusted third
parties such as banks prevent double spends by privately verifying each transaction. The Bitcoin Network prevents double
spends by allowing every member to verify every transaction.

Digital objects like files and text are easy to duplicate. With the click of a button or a few keys, any number of files
can be copied from one location to another. This makes digital devices very simple and useful for the average user.

However, costless duplication is not a desirable trait in money. It would not be desirable to have a monetary system
which allowed anyone to duplicate their money at will. This is the Double Spend Problem: _how can a receiver of digital
money be sure that the money they were sent was not simultaneously sent to someone else_? How can all members of a
monetary network be sure others are not duplicating their money at will?

> **Physical Money**
> 
> When money is physical, the Double Spend Problem is of no concern. The same physical bill or coin cannot be in two
> places at once. The Double Spend Problem only occurs in digital systems, where the same file or data can be present in
> two places at once. With this in mind, the Double Spend Problem was not always an issue. Rather, it was "unsolved" by
> the digitization of money.

#### Solutions

Two types of solutions to the Double Spend Problem have arisen to maintain trust in digital money. The first relies on
trusted central authorities to prevent double spends and other types of fraud. The second rejects central authorities
and allows any individual to check all transactions for double spends.

##### Trusted Third Parties

In order to prevent fraudulent transactions such as double spends, certain institutions are entrusted to verify all
transactions privately. These institutions include payment processors, banks, Automated Clearing Houses, and ultimately
central banks. Each institution maintains its own private ledger and applies its own rules to verifying the
transactions.

Banks and payment processors are accountable to the local central bank and government. For this reason, they are usually
honest. However, the costs imposed by this system are many. Most financial institutions charge fees and impose limits on
the size, type, and number of transactions a client can execute. Additionally, transactions can take anywhere from 30-90
days to settle depending on the transaction type.

##### A Distributed Ledger

Bitcoin solves the double spend problem by using a **decentralized ledger**, which all users can access. Because all
members of the Bitcoin network can examine the full history of transactions, they can be sure that neither their coins
nor any other coins have been double spent.

When one user sends bitcoin to another, they destroy the coin they own and create a new coin owned by the receiver. The
destruction of the sender's coin is recorded for all to see, so that they can never send it to someone else.

Bitcoin is an open system, meaning that anyone can start using the network without paying entry or maintenance fees.
Likewise, there are no restrictions on the number or size of transactions. Additionally, thanks to the immutability of
the blockchain, Bitcoin transactions can achieve final settlement in as little as one hour.


Case Study - Bitcoin
--------------------

### Concepts

#### Timestamp Server/Hash Function

A timestamp server is essentially a has function, which works by taking a hash of a block of items to be 
timestamped/hashed and widely publishing the hash. The timestamp proves that the data must have existed at the
_time_ and, in the context of bitcoin, the financial asset has been proved to be owned by a legal owner at a real time.
This is probably why it's called _timestamp_, though it is really as simple as a SHA-256 hash string.

> The timestamp is probably a good name for general audience. But since we are talking about tech aspect of bitcoin now,
> we will, in the following texts, refer to it as simply "hash"

Each hash is generated by taking the previous hash into its digest and generate a new hash from it, forming a chain,
with each additional hash reinforcing the ones before it.

#### Proof-of-Work (PoW)

To Be Continued.
