---
layout: post
title: ArangoDB Reference Guide
tags: [ArangoDB, Database, Knowledge Graph]
category: FINALIZED
color: rgb(86, 113, 56)
feature-img: "assets/img/post-cover/2-cover.png"
thumbnail: "assets/img/post-cover/2-cover.png"
author: QubitPi
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

* TOC
{:toc}


Concepts
--------

### Database Interaction

ArangoDB is a database that serves JSON documents. The [web interface](#web-interface) we just saw is called
**Aardvark**. There is also an interactive shell, called **Arangosh**, for developers. In addition, there are
[drivers](https://www.arangodb.com/docs/stable/drivers/index.html) that provides programmatic access to different
languages, such as Java.

### Data model

### Document

The documents you can store in ArangoDB closely follow the JSON format, although they are **stored in a binary format
called [VelocyPack](https://github.com/arangodb/velocypack#readme)**, which is the same thing as JSON with offering
_more efficient storage and data manipulation_. **A document contains zero or more attributes**, each of these
attributesvhaving a value. A value can either be an atomic type, i. e. number, string, boolean or null, or a compound
type, i.e. an array or embedded document/object. Arrays and sub-objects can contain all of these types, which means that
arbitrarily nested data structures can be represented in a single document.

#### Document Example

Here is an example document record stored in ArangoDB:

```json
{
    "_id":"persons/alice",
    "_key":"alice",
    "_rev":"_cZCenLi---",
    "name":"Alice"
}
```

#### Document Key

A document key is a string that uniquely identifies a document **in a given collection**. Document keys are stored in
the `_key` attribute of documents. The key values are automatically indexed by ArangoDB in a collection's primary index.
The `_key` value of a document is immutable once the document has been created.

##### Key v.s ID

You probably see the difference in the [example above](#document-example). The `_key` is the "ID" of a collection,
whereas the `_id` is the "ID" of entire database and is unique across all collections within that database. Note the
difference is that `_id` is prefixed with a collection name (e.g. "person")

### Collection

Documents are grouped into collections. **A collection contains zero or more documents**. If you are familiar with
relational database management systems (RDBMS) then it is safe to compare collections to tables and documents to rows.
The difference is that in a traditional RDBMS, you have to define columns before you can store records in a table. Such
definitions are also known as _schemas_. _ArangoDB is by default schema-less_, which means that there is no need to
define what attributes a document can have. Every single document can have a completely different structure and still be
stored together with other documents in a single collection.

There are two types of collections

1. **document collection** - also refered to as vertex collections in the context of graphs)
2. **edge collections** - store documents as well, but they include two special attributes, _from and _to, which are
   used to create relations between documents. Usually, two documents (vertices) stored in document collections are
   linked by a document (edge) stored in an edge collection.

### Database

Collections are stored in databases. There can be one or many databases. The default database `_system` is special,
because it cannot be removed. Database users are managed in this database

### Query

Queries are used to

* filter documents based on certain criteria,
* compute new data,
* manipulate or delete existing documents.

ArangoDB query is written in [ArangoDB Query Language (AQL)](#arangodb-query-language-aql).

#### Cursor

Cursors are used to iterate over the result of queries, so that you get easily processable batches instead of one big
chunk.

### Index

Indexes allow fast access to documents, provided the indexed attribute(s) are used in a query. While **ArangoDB
automatically indexes some system attributes, including `_id`, `_key`, `_from` and `_to`**, users are free to create extra indexes on non-system attributes of
documents.

User-defined indexes can be created on collection level. Most user-defined indexes can be created by specifying the
names of the index attributes. Some index types allow indexing just one attribute (e.g. fulltext index) whereas other
index types allow indexing multiple attributes at the same time.

> ⚠️ Creating new indexes requires exclusive locking on collection. The collection is not available while the index is
> being created. This could be undesirable if you have to perform it on an on-flight application without a dedicated
> maintenance window.

#### Primary Index

**Each collection** has a primary index which is a persistent index for the document keys (`_key` attribute) of all
documents in the collection. _The primary index allows quick selection of documents in the collection using either the
`_key` or `_id` attributes_.

[To be continued...](https://www.arangodb.com/docs/stable/indexing-index-basics.html#primary-index)

#### Persistent indexes

#### Geo-Spatial Indexes


Docker
------

* https://hub.docker.com/_/arangodb
* [Passwordless login - `ARANGO_NO_AUTH=1`](https://www.arangodb.com/docs/stable/deployment-single-instance-manual-start.html#authentication)
* [Run container](https://www.arangodb.com/download-major/docker/):

  docker run -p 8529:8529 -e ARANGO_ROOT_PASSWORD=openSesame arangodb/arangodb:3.8.1


Java API
--------

### Get Collection Size

```java
arangoDb.db(databaseName).collection(collectionName).count().getCount();
```

### Troubleshooting

#### [Always Check for DB Existence Before Executing Query](https://github.com/arangodb/arangodb-java-driver/issues/254)

Otherwise a runtime exception will break the application with the following error: 

```
Cause:class com.arangodb.ArangoDBException --> Msg:Response: 404, Error: 1228 - database not found
com.arangodb.ArangoDBException: Response: 404, Error: 1228 - database not found
```

We should make sure the table exists before executing query using, for example:

```java
ArangoDatabase db = ...

if (!db.exists()) {
    // execute logic on non-existing databases
}
```


Command Line Reference
----------------------

### Drop a Database

`db._dropDatabase(name)` statement is used to drop a database. You can drop the database only within the `_system`
database and the `_system` database can't be deleted.

1. Login to arango shell.

       $arangosh
       Please specify a password:
       
                                              _     
       __ _ _ __ __ _ _ __   __ _  ___  ___| |__  
       / _` | '__/ _` | '_ \ / _` |/ _ \/ __| '_ \
       | (_| | | | (_| | | | | (_| | (_) \__ \ | | |
       \__,_|_|  \__,_|_| |_|\__, |\___/|___/_| |_|
       |___/
       
       arangosh (ArangoDB 3.7.11 [darwin] 64bit, using build , VPack 0.1.33, RocksDB 6.8.0, ICU 64.2, V8 7.9.317, OpenSSL 1.1.1k  25 Mar 2021)
       Copyright (c) ArangoDB GmbH
       
       Command-line history will be persisted when the shell is exited. You can use `--console.history false` to turn this off
       Connected to ArangoDB 'http+tcp://127.0.0.1:8529, version: 3.7.11 [SINGLE, server], database: '_system', username: 'root'
       
       Type 'tutorial' for a tutorial or 'help' to see common examples
       127.0.0.1:8529@_system>

2. List all the databases.

       127.0.0.1:8529@_system> db._databases()
       [
       "_system",
       "demodb",
       "example"
       ]

3. Drop the database demodb.

       127.0.0.1:8529@_system> db._dropDatabase ("demodb")

Dropping a database is an asynchronous operation. Database is physically removed once all clients are disconnected and
references have been garbage-collected.

